Daniel, thanks for doing this.
>> Happy to be here.
>> So, uh, give us a sense of this
incredibly viral sensation that has been
open evidence, uh, in terms of what type
of, um, coverage it has of American
doctors today. As much as
we would like to think that it's going
especially well for us, I would sort of
say as a qualifying point that um in all
of the subindustries of AI, you see an
acceleration and compression, right? So
the the adoption cycles even outside of
open evidence before we get to open
evidence in other fields of knowledge
work and coding and so on are hyperco
compressed, right? It used to take, you
know, half a decade or a decade for
something to become standard and now it
seems to happen in two years or or a
year. So the same thing's happened with
open evidence. In about 18 months, it's
become the operating system for clinical
knowledge in the United States. Uh it is
used something like 20 times more than
the next most used platform of any kind
in our specific segment which is high
stakes clinical decision support for
doctors. So high stakes clinical
decision support for doctors is a
specific category of medicine. It's
distinct from say paperwork or it's
distinct from scribing.
um those things are, you know, part of
the workflow of being a doctor. Uh but
the stakes and the consequences uh are
different. Um if you get it wrong, you
can go back and do it again. Uh that's
not the case with a patient. Uh you have
to get it right. You have one shot to
get it right. And so clinical decision-m
of which clinical decision support uh is
in service of is unquestionably the
highest stakes area of medicine. We're
probably the only company working at the
tip of that spear. Most people have
self- selected themselves out of the
problem of high stakes clinical
decision- making uh certainly through an
AI lens um because they view it as
ambitious
>> and could you explain it or because I
think fundamentally it's about picking
information and then translating that
into specific either recommendations or
diagnosis for a patient. Can you tell us
more about how that works?
>> Yes, one way to sort of simplify it down
is at its foundation it's a search
problem but it's a very semantic search
problem. Uh so most search traditionally
works with keywords, right? So like you
know flights to Barcelona or hotels in
Barcelona most of the you know most of
the key words there can be captured in
like a couple of words and certainly in
a sentence and that's sort of
traditional Google search. Even if you
were to think about clinical decision
support as a search problem simply
describing your search query if you want
to think about it that way usually takes
many sentences. So an example I like to
give is you have a 44 year old female
patient. She has moderate to severe
psoriasis. That's the red stuff on your
skin. um you know you're a dermatologist
that's so far so simple you would just
prescribe one of the many creams you see
commercials for on television except uh
she has um MS
uh so now it gets interesting because
you want to treat her psoriasis um but
you don't want to make the MS worse and
you are not a neurologist you're a
dermatologist so neurology is not your
specialty um but you don't want to go
refer her to a neurologist because you
want to treat her psoriasis and and if
you just keep referring people in
circles medicine never happens from the
ether. You might have heard as a
dermatologist that the new classes of
psoriasis treatments um which are
biologics they're IL7 inhibitors and
I2L23 inhibitors might have some
interactivity uh with the neurological
dimension of a patient's condition.
That's about all you know. Um you didn't
learn this in medical school because
IL23s were FDA approved in 2019, right?
And it's one of the great themes of open
evidence is that the sort of golden age
of biotechnology is sort of the dark
ages of physician burnout because it's
just impossible to keep up with all the
new drugs and all the new mechanisms of
action and so on. So you know it was
approved in 2019. You might have
graduated medical school in 2005, right?
So you you didn't cover medical school
and that's it. That's kind of that's
what you know. So your question then is,
you know, for a 40-year-old female
patient with moderate to severe
psoriasis, is an IL7 inhibitor, an IL23
inhibitor more appropriate and more
safely tolerated with respect to not
aggravating the MS? Now that's that's
not a academic question. Um that's a
very consequential question. I 17
inhibitors will actually make the MS
worse. I 23 inhibitors are safe and well
tolerated case of MS. That's an example
of where medicine can go wrong because
even five or 10 years ago, um either
you're referring that person to a
neurologist in which case you're just
getting referrals in circles and
medicine is not happening or
unfortunately what would more likely
happen is they would just 50/50 and that
MS might be aggravated. And you know
it's well known and it's been often
repeated that medical error is a third
leading cause of death in the United
States after heart disease and cancer.
But even that kind of that statistic
kind of understates it because that's
just looking at death, right? In the
case of my in my example, um this
patient is not going to die as a result
of taking an IL7 inhibitor. She's going
to have a relapse of MS. And so it's not
just that medical error historically was
a leading cause of death. It's that uh
as many people died from medical error
probably a factor of 10 to a hundred as
many people had a a co-orbidity or
condition that became aggravated and got
worse and so on. So coming back to your
question that whole string is the search
query and so you can't just do search in
a traditional way where you sort of say
you know isle 17 because that's not
really what the question's about. um nor
does the physician have the time to go
read book chapters on this stuff. What
you need is a semantic understanding of
the of the query in the way that another
human physician would semantically
understand that query and then it's
actually quite deterministic and simple
after that. Um once you semantically
understand the query uh you can from the
world of published biomedical literature
you could find the exact snippets in a
phase 3 RCT a randomized control trial
in the New England Journal of Medicine
that tested each of these things and
found that one aggravated MS and the
other didn't. Right? So once once you
have a semantic understanding of the
query the rest is fairly deterministic
and it's almost a search problem. Um,
but all of the all of the juice is in,
you know, connecting the very complex
semantic meaning of a medical scenario
to the answer where the answer might be
in a phase 3 RCT in the New England
Journal of Medicine and in a snippet in
in not even in the in the abstract but
in the methodology section or in the
population. I don't deal with that
ambiguity actually because I feel like
in the context of medical information,
there's things that are uh in pre-baked
clinical guidelines, you know, yeah,
>> certain types of conditions, we're going
to do XYZ and that's sort of the
recommended path.
>> There's stuff that's kind of recently
published. There's evidence in a certain
direction or maybe it's by the label or
something else
>> and there's a bunch of stuff that's a
bit more TBD in terms of those clinical
trials that may cont
sporadic. How do you how do you deal
with that third bucket of ambiguity and
how do you think in Dell about capturing
that broader knowledge growth over time?
>> So the first way to deal with that third
bucket of ambiguity is ensure that your
users are physicians and not patients
and we've made that strategic decision
and we keep thinking we're going to
change that decision and uh we've been
talking about changing that decision
since the inception of the company and
so far have not changed that decision
for all the reasons implicit in your
question. There's an enormous luxury
that we have as builders um in having
doctors as users because the MD is
attached to their name, right? So, they
need to protect that MD and they're
going to use us as a tool in the same
way as a Wall Street trader might use a
Bloomberg terminal. If a Bloomberg
terminal, for example, produced, you
know, an inaccurate quote on a bond that
was very obviously inaccurate, you know,
is off by an order of magnitude and the
and the trader, you know, in a hedge
fund just sort of, well, I mean, that's
odd. do you indicate in the the user NRP
that hey there's some ambiguity around
this or here's complete evidence and
here's the
>> absolutely so there are areas of
medicine where there's a lot of
conflicting evidence and and that's
indicated and and it's not presenting
answers you know we're used by 40% of
doctors in the United States daily on
average it's about 20 times as as much
usage as the than the the next thing
that could be described as a clinical
decision support platform it's become
the default operating system of clinical
knowledge and a lot of the value
proposition early on is that we made
references and citations is a first
class citizen uh before that was in
chatbt. So we were actually providing
references and citations 6 months or 9
months before chatbt started doing that.
Um that was a big reason we had adoption
because people could interrogate and
audit the source. Right? So right there
there's a difference because then it's
not an answer engine. It was never
presented as an answer engine. It was
always presented as a search engine. The
way we did frame it was um as part of
the long continuum of of search and and
Google uh you know we're a Google
portfolio company and I've always framed
this as part of the very long continuum
of search engines as opposed to
something net new um because I do view
technology as a progression and
continuum and that created a certain
social contract with the users who in
addition to being physicians and have
that MD that they need to defend um on
top of it viewed this as a uh a router
to the phase 3 RCT in the New England
Journal of Medicine and maybe the
conflicting phase 3 RCT in JAMAMO,
right? And we'd route them to both. Very
useful.
>> Users do look at source material some of
the time. all the time. I would say it's
almost the default behavior of a user to
start with some complex query that you
could not put into Google for the
reasons I mentioned because it's a
paragraph long and then
have it produce within you know from a
search space or a surface area of 35
million biomedical publications the
exact three to five you know canonical
landmark phase 3 RCTs or guidelines
lines or other sources of information
that um are responsive not answers that
that are responsive to their question
and then I would say almost the default
behaviors then they go out you know I
think we're one of the largest sources
of referral traffic to the England
Journal of Medicine after Google and the
rankings I don't number two or three or
four but we're we're one of the largest
sources of referral traffic to our
partner in the New England Journal of
Medicine that's a testament to the way
people use it historically it was very
hard to do two things it was hard to
describe a complex patient scenario or
case um into a search engine and have it
come out with anything useful. And it
was hard to find um from the tens of
billions of tokens, if you want to think
of it as an engineer, uh that constitute
the world of peer-reviewed public
medical literature, it's very difficult
to find, you know, the seven snippets
that are directly responsive to a
question and to the semantic meaning of
the question as opposed to a few
keywords. So, we just did those two
things. just did those two things
extremely extremely well. We framed the
right social contract. We picked our
audience extremely well, you know, and
all of those things start to stack um
into something that looks more like a,
you know, a Bloomberg terminal for
doctors uh where it's just a protool.
They're using this because it has, you
know, the right data that goes in
because AI is gold in, gold out, garbage
in, garbage out. So, they know this is
not training on tweets. They know this
is trained on New England Journal of
Medicine and JAMAMA and the rest. They
know that we have these partnerships,
these strategic partnerships with the um
you know gold standards of medical
knowledge. They know that they're not
going to get an answer from open
evidence. They're going to get a routing
to a source that answers the question.
And so I think all these things sort of
stack into something that feels just
like a a pro tool.
>> I want to remind for a minute, you were
already a successful entrepreneur before
you started Open Evidence. um you wanted
to build an impact driven company like
you wanted to work in health. What was
the moment of decision to serve
physicians versus consumers because you
also think a lot like a consumer
entrepreneur in terms of growth?
>> Well, that I served both. So, this was a
hack. I wanted to build a consumer
internet company for knowledge workers
and I don't think that ever been done
before.
So, I didn't want to build a healthcare
company uh at all. Uh I love uh
Sequoia's quote that um open evidence is
a consumer internet company masquerading
as a healthcare company. Uh I had zero
interest in building a healthcare
company. Open evidence is not a
healthcare company. I wanted to build a
consumer in a company but I wanted to do
something that no one had ever done
before which is treat knowledge workers
like consumers. So my whole career had
been you know prior to this dealing with
knowledge workers right and and people
have a reductive view of consumers. they
think of, you know, they think of like
14-year-olds on TikTok and that tends to
be like their archetype of what a
consumer is. And that's one type of
consumer. Um, but, you know, traders on
Wall Street are consumers and people.
Lawyers are consumers and people, and
doctors are consumers and people. And
what I realized is no one had ever
treated doctors that way before. Doctors
were just kind of treated as these
appendages of health systems. I was
like, hm, it's an interesting way to
organize the medical system and the
health system. And you know, you start
to investigate and pull the thread a
little bit and you start to understand
why, you know, there there very few
things that people can agree about in
America. They can agree Congress is
dysfunctional and they agree that
American healthcare is dysfunctional.
It's like bipartisan universal
consensus. But you start to really
investigate and you know, you come
across two or three things and you're
like maybe that begins to explain the
dysfunctionality, right? And to me in
particular, the idea that doctors who
were the fighter pilots, who were the
knowledge workers, who were the people
who have that MD on the line and have to
make that high stakes decision, weren't
even their own gatekeepers as far as the
technology they use. That was that was a
pretty profound realization. And so we
did something that had never been done
before, ever, which is we treated them
as consumers and as people that uh could
go on to the app store and download a
free app and start using it. And it
sounds so stupidly simple, but it was it
was really profound and it was really
effective because no one had ever done
that before. It's kind of almost
analogous to in relationships, whether
friendships or romantic relationships.
People can get caught in these sort of
culde-sacs where there's a rigidity to
their dynamic and to their relationship.
And then there's a breakthrough where
one person says something that they've
it they've just never said it before or
they've just never said it in that way
before and then there's like a
breakthrough. It hits different, right?
And in in in uh in psychiatry or
psychology and therapy, a lot of that
field is encouraging this behavior in
others is to just sort of break free of
culde-sacs um of of dialectics of
relationship dynamics and just say
something in a way that's never been
said before. Do something that you know
that hits different. And um long story
short, you know, we we we did that with
doctors and and it was it wasn't the
complexity of the idea. it was just no
one who had ever addressed them as
consumers before. And um you know we had
this realization which is pretty obvious
that while this wouldn't have been
possible 20 years ago today every
virtually every doctor in America is
walking around with a computer in their
pocket that they own called an you know
an iPhone or an Android phone usually
and they own that computer right
>> now it's really cool yeah I mean the the
velocity of it and usefulness and value
is reflective in that velocity
>> the scale and the speed of it and more
common cases are cases in which the
leadership of the hospital system are
very avid
users. So the entire, you know, this
whole senior leadership of UCSF, of MGH,
of Mayo Clinic, of Cleveland Clinic, of
New York Presbyterian, um, Mount Sinai,
Cedar Sinai, you know, right up to the
the chief medical officers, the chief
physicians, and the CEOs in many cases
are personally avid users.
>> The reality too is that people are
basically using Google for some of these
use cases, or are they using a new tool
to just work? I I have a sort of
slightly separate question which is
maybe back to the consumer versus
medical or physician side of this
because you know I started a digital
health company maybe a decade or 15
years ago and one of the thing and we
were basically initially providing uh
really key genetic information. We had a
physician in the loop at all times. But
one of the things we ran into was um
what I kept as almost journalistic
viewpoint in the medical community
towards what information their patients
should and should not get. And I think
part of that was real concern about what
the patients could do in terms of
exacting information, but I think a lot
of it was just wanting to be a
gatekeeper or part of it was just not
wanting to deal with the questions of
the patient. How do you think about that
philosophically in terms of what what
type of information should patients have
access to versus not? How much should
patients be able to advocate for
themselves? So I' I've experienced both
sides of this. So I've I've been on the
patient side and I'm very sympathetic to
that. Um because the reality is medicine
is not perfect. Uh if it were, you know,
everyone would be living to 80 or 90
years old. So clearly medicine is not
perfect and uh in a world where it's not
perfect, patients should definitely have
some some role in agency in that. Um
what we what we have done is encourage
physicians to use open evidence to
generate patient handouts. And that's
actually a very um widely used
secondary. It's mainly clinical report,
but we have all these secondary use
cases like prior authorization letters
and insurance appeal letters. And one of
the most common of those sort of
secondary use cases is generating these
patient handouts. The other side of this
that I can appreciate is it it took me
personally taking my first graduate
level statistics course at Harvard to
really understand these clinical trials,
>> right? And so I'm sympathetic to the
idea that a patient simply finding some
clinical trial published in the New
England Journal of Medicine because it
was mentioned on CNN or Fox News and
then going and trying to read it,
especially through the lens of fear or
hope
>> is not necessarily going to result in a
in the most sort of constructive
decision-making process. I mean there's
no good answer. The reality is is very
tough, right? You want to give pat you
want to enable patients with all the
answers that are clear and consensus
>> and certainly you want to give them the
tools to make sure that their physician
is not missing anything. At the same
time, you you you know, you don't want
you can imagine all the failed cases
where that could go wrong, where they're
coming and saying, "Well, why aren't you
putting my mother, you know, on this
drug with this with their own handouts?"
And the answer might be a very technical
answer, right? The answer might be that
um because your mother also has this
other coorbidity and if you look at the
p value, the p value of the efficacy of
this drug is not statistically robust in
the presence of this other coorbidity.
And the patient is like what's a p
value? But they're not going to just
stop at what's a p- value. They're going
to get really upset. it says in this
case that this other treatment is
effective and then then you're just in
this endless circle where where the
physician who has by definition taken at
least one graduate level statistics
course is trying to explain
to a civilian what a p value is and and
I think that's a that's probably not a
constructive outcome. So it's a balance.
We we encourage physicians to use open
evidence to use p patient handouts
especially where guideline based
medicine is concerned.
>> So I think you mentioned something
really interesting earlier which is the
velocity at which your product got
adopted was incredibly fast and I think
part of that was just it's incredibly
valuable as you have a lot of these new
different tools. Uh and I think that's
one of the almost underappreciated
aspects of this wave of AI is not only
is there a fundamental technology shift
that's enabling all sorts of new
products but also there's this massive
shift in terms of the openness of
adoption but people and organizations to
new technologies and that's in terms of
what you've been doing with evidence
it's to your point of the medical
scribing thing it's companies like a
bridge or others um if you think ahead
10 or 20 years and this may be
impossible to extrapolate how do you
think the change of medicine or the
state of medicine changes in general
like Are we are you still going to the
doctor's office for visits? Are you
interacting with some online tool and
it's backed stopped by a doctor?
Are drugs developed differently? I'm
just sort of wondering at a high level
how you think about the whole industry
evolving or changing given both suddenly
markets are open in ways that they
weren't before but also there's new
technology ways that are going to
impinge on markets.
>> It's getting difficult. The the
definition of a of a singular event
horizon is you cannot even project you
know into the near future let alone the
far future. And I think we're you know
we're probably in the midst of something
like that. with respect to doctors in
the loop. Planes have been able to land
themselves for a very long time. It's a
peak into an in a way a future by
analogy because
that's a that's a that's a domain or an
industry where there's no debate really
uh as to whether the technology is there
and yet you don't see this sort of mass
movement um of airline passengers to get
the pilots uh out of cockpits. There
just isn't. I I'm not aware of one mass
movement to get pilots out of cockpits.
Then the question is why? And and of
course uh that is a uh attribute of of
human psychology that we are
anthropologically tribal and uh we don't
abstract trust well. Um we we we
personify trust and we trust things that
we personify and anthropomorphize. Um
and there's a whole history
>> already doing a lot with the chatbots,
right? In other words, there are people
who
>> effectively view themselves as being in
relationships with
>> Yeah. They don't have bodies yet. I
mean, you could start to reason by
analogy. Would there be any more of a
mass public movement to have computers
land planes if in if you still had a
cockpit? If you just remove the two
seats, no one wants that. Okay. What if
you keep the two seats, but they're
empty? I still think no one wants that.
What if you keep the two seats and there
are
mannequins essentially?
>> Mhm. that
act as visual surrogates for the
computer system and what it's doing. I
think if you were to pull people, that'd
be the first time you see this little
uptick in willingness. I think it would
still be the minority.
>> Can I ask a question? If we're talking
about the near future, um uh you've
you've mentioned before like we are in
an era of um you know uh in an amazingly
optimistic way like an explosion of
biomedical knowledge and it should
accelerate. You've mentioned before that
the half-life of the knowledge you learn
in med school as a physician is
decreasing rapidly.
>> Do you think that's going to change like
how you were educated as a doctor?
>> I think medical education is going to
radically change. I I I I think doctors
are are going to be in the loop for a
very long time. They have been a loop
since you know the ancient Greeks if not
you know the ancient Egyptians. I think
you're going to be in the loop for very
very very long time and for for the rest
of our lifetimes if not longer. medical
education is going to change radically
um because um it's just you know the the
statistic I I cite and all of this is in
peer-reviewed public uh publicly
available medical literature the rate of
doubling of medical knowledge as
measured by citations
uh in 1950 was every 50 years so every
50 years the number of total citations
of peer-reviewed medical literature
doubled uh today it's every 73 days uh
by an estimate in the British medical
journal and one in nature I think that
methodology was a little bit aggressive
uh because they were looking at the
totality of all publications. Not all
publications are equal. But, you know,
we came up internally with a more
conservative one cuz we didn't want to,
you know, we didn't want to drink the
Kool-Aid. So we said, okay, let's just
look at the top quartortile of
peer-reviewed medical literature and
let's let's pretend that physicians
never need to read the bottom
three/arters of medical literature,
which is not really true, but let's just
let's let's let's do this with one hand
tied behind our back. And if you do it
that way, it's every 5 years. So um if
you if you use the more conservative
methodology it's not every 73 days but
every 5 years uh the the the the total
sum of the top cortile of peer-reviewed
medical literature by citations uh
doubles. Now you could say well look
for for humans medicine has become
specialized so your dermatologist
doesn't you know need to read everything
in neurology. That was my initial
example and now they have open evidence
so they can bridge some of this stuff.
Um, so why don't we go even more
conservative still and say if a
physician just needed to read the top
10% of peer-reviewed medical literature
in their own specialty. So now this is
very conservative. There's no cross
functional interdisciplinary medicine at
all. Everybody's hyper specialized. It's
not a great outcome, but let's just
pretend that's the case. Um, what would
that mean? Well, now you're in the realm
of doable. Obviously, every 73 days and
every 5 years is not doable. But now
you're in the realm of doable. But you
but that physician would need to spend
on average nine hours a day just reading
the top 10% of peer-reviewed medical
literature just in their own discipline.
Of course, they would never see
patients, see, spend time with their
family and so on. Now, you can sort of
keep going more and more conservative
with these methodologies. And
realistically, not everything even
within pediatric cardiology is relevant
to every pediatric cardiologist. And so
maybe it's not 9 hours, maybe it's 4
hours, maybe it's 3 hours a day, but you
there's some point at which it's going
to be like you'd want them to know all
this stuff even the, you know, narrowed
down all the way and it still is kind of
uh impractical. At minimum, I think that
this framework of medical school being a
very defined period in time and then
having continuing medical education,
which is kind of historically been this
sort of like
uh-huh okay sort of, you know, wink wink
kind of thing that is going to more or
less invert where the continuing medical
education is going to be the majority of
your medical education. Um, and that's
already happening. That's not a future
projection, right? If if you speak to
really phenomenal, you know, world-class
physicians, they will tell you very
openly that 90 95% of what they
practice, they learned postgraduating
medical school and and in most cases
post their fellowships, they had
fellowships and residencies for their
residencies. And some of the greatest
physicians that I've ever met and spoken
with tell me, you know, extreme things
like the majority of what they practice
today, they learned in the last two
years. And I've had I've had a
70-year-old physician tell me that. Now,
these are worldclass people. But what
that shows for everybody is that um you
you're going to need to invert the
construct of
>> Does that change the nature of a
residency or the the way that physicians
are trained? It's very structured today
>> in a very specific sequence of steps
that was based in some part on how you
should train somebody 50 years ago.
>> Yeah. No, it's going to it's going to
change. It is it is changing. there
there are these very um avanguard
>> approaches to residency at some of the
top places like Mayo, Cleveland, UCSF
which are trying to deconstruct the
50-year-old model. And
>> what do they do differently?
>> They encourage evidence-based med
medicine, not just guideline based
medicine. Um they uh encourage the
curbside consult. Um they basically try
to solve the problem of information
overload through uh you know distributed
hive mind. So
>> what does a curbside consult mean? So, a
curbside consult uh sounds fancy, but it
just means, you know, go ask some other
physicians who might know something
about this. I mean, all of these things
sound obvious. Who wouldn't want
evidence-based medicine? Who wouldn't
want physicians asking a panel of other
physicians who might also know something
about it, you know, about the thing? The
demands on a knowledge worker are highly
correlated to the number and complexity
of the tools available, right? Like in
1917, you know, at the end of World War
I, your tools were basically nothing.
you know, you had gauze and some
scissors, right? So, this is all very
very new that getting into my early
example like IL is 17 inhibitors, resile
23 inhibitors and biologics and the
treatment of psoriasis where someone has
a neurological coorbidity like that's
all the last like 5 seconds from a
historical perspective. So, of course,
the profession has to change and it's
going to change evidence-based medicine,
curbside consults, um, distributed
decisionmaking. You know, that's a big
part of it. Like, a lot of what's so
incredible about all these famous places
that are rightly famous, Mayo,
Cleveland, UCSF, MGH, um, others, um, is
they really are sort of at the at the
vanguard of thinking about distributed
decision making. Like
>> if there's a patient with a complex fact
pattern, let's bring in sort of
interdisciplinary let's bring a group of
doctors, you know, across disciplines
and look at this in an interdisciplinary
way. Let's have a cardiologist and a
neurologist and an oncologist look. Now,
the issue is that's very expensive. As
I'm describing this, I'm just thinking
real time like this really expensive to
do. So then there's this um equity issue
where it's pretty clear what the right
way to practice medicine is in 2025 in
light of this explosion of treatments in
the golden age of biotechnology. It's
not clear how to pay for that because
now it's not just one extremely
expensive specialist. Now it's three or
four
>> ability. We don't have that many
specialist.
>> We're not making more oncologists at any
faster rate than we
>> all just translates into sort of
AIdriven tooling or things like that
that help augment that. The hope and
this is kind of where we're in the midst
of this is that um in underresourced
areas as an example um you know we have
uh we we we have physicians using open
evidence in in every state electoral
county and zip code in the United States
including rural Alaska and southwestern
Georgia. And you know we we get letters
from doctors because when you when you
make something awesome that's free when
you make something awesome that has a
subscription I think people like it but
they don't send you fan mail. when you
make something awesome that's free, they
send you fan mail. So, we get fan mail
from, you know, southwestern rural
Georgia from an oncologist who's like,
I'm one of two oncologists in a 50-mi
radius serving a 75% African-American
population with a median household
income of $43,000 a year. And I use open
evidence as my curbside consult, which
by which he means, you know, as my panel
of other so that starts to bridge it uh
and and I think increasingly certainly
in rural areas and healthcare deserts at
the fringes and edges of healthcare in
the United States. That's absolutely how
certainly open evidence is being used
and how AI I think broadly is going to
be used at least to sort of bridge
bridge that gap. Um and and I think
that's a that's a real clear silver
lining or positive side of of AI right
now.
>> What do you think um consumers
might do productively in the future in
terms of like preventative health? Like
you you know you're treating
doctors and knowledge workers as
consumers. Yeah. Um there's not enough
of them. hopefully you will multiply
their productivity dramatically.
>> Um, do you imagine consumers will be
responsible some for some piece of their
own health differently?
>> This is not going to be a uh a popular
answer or or a politic answer, but um if
you go spend 5 seconds in Japan, I'm
obsessed with Japan. I named my first
company Kencho. I was in Japan two
months ago. I've been in Japan like a
dozen times. I'm obsessed with Japanese
culture. Um, the difference in why
there's so many differences, some of
which are genetic, but a big difference
in why they're so healthy in Japan is
they just do all the things that
everyone know and I'm not generalizing
to all Japanese and there's now Western
food and Western culinary traditions
that have entered Japan and it's all
complex. We live a globalized world, but
>> disclaimer, disclaimer, disclaimer,
>> disclaimer, disclaimer, disclaimer. But
there isn't some net new list, right?
So, I was in Japan a couple months ago
and it is striking. It is shocking the
extent to which um especially if you go
outside the big cities and go to places
like uh Kyoto or smaller city cities
like Hakone or so on just they're all
walking. They're all just the average
Japanese and at all ages. You have 70 80
year olds are walking 10,000 15,000
steps a day. It's a walking culture. And
and it's not just my sort of
romanticized illusion as a white western
looking at it. Like I've gone pretty
deep on this.
I've I've been there again like a dozen
times. I've had long conversations with
people that are there, not just
academics and scholars, but just
ordinary people on the street, taxi c
taxi cap drivers and so on. You know,
they like walking and also the older
they get, the more they like walking.
The younger kids actually, you know, the
the ones that are 65 and 70, they'll
just go walk four miles um to work. They
don't retire. They don't fetishize
retirement. um uh they have concepts in
their culture of
um you know what what what Plato called
you know a good life but in in in in
Japanese culture a good life is
inextricable uh from a life with purpose
you know an idol life cannot in Japanese
culture be a good life like those are
those are um incompatible notions you
know idleness and uh and fulfillment and
so uh there's no concept of fetishizing
like I'm just going to work really hard
make a lot of money and at 65
you know, I'm going to hang out on the
beach. That's just not a concept really
in at least the traditional culture
absent the western recent western
influences. So people work past 65 into
their 70s into their 80s. You know,
that's when it really matters, right?
Like that, you know, that's when that's
when risk of mortality starts to go to
go up a lot. And then of course famously
the diet sort of it's not just you know
a sort of a pescatarian scoop diet but
it's also the fact that um you know you
can you can almost eat anything if it's
in the right uh portions. Um you know
they they don't they don't gouge
themselves on food. They they eat until
70 80% full. All these things that are
famously known and I think at least
we're having a conversation about it now
in the United States. For the longest
time, you had things that every doctor
believed. No one would there's no I have
never met a doctor who disagrees that,
you know, as you you get past a certain
point in body weight, your risk of all
sorts of things goes up. But but 10 15
years ago, no one wanted no doctor would
have wanted to say that out loud cuz it
sounded like
>> Well, how do we break that culturally?
Because I think ultimately to your
point, you know, physicians are viewed
as people who have extra knowledge.
>> Yeah. who are supposed to be helping
patients and obviously they're very
focused on that. My sister's a doctor,
you know, like I think it's it's that
you know
>> for many people I know it's really core
to why they became a physician.
>> Yeah.
>> But at the same time political culture
took over and prevented them from
speaking their minds on things that were
really clear on evidence that had a huge
impact for the patient population. Yet
nobody would stand up and say actually
it's really bad that we're glorifying
the fact that you know being
dramatically overweight is healthy.
>> I think the pendulum swings back and
forth. I think all these issues are are
deeply entwined. I think that um we're
now for the first time in a long time
having a more open conversation that is
not just reduced through the lens of
identity politics around um health uh
life choices. And it's not just obesity
versus or or it's not just overweight
versus um not overweight. You know,
let's use something that has nothing to
do with weight. um uh neurogenerative.
Now there's a there's a strong genetic
component to neurogenerative and there
are definitely people who have never
used their brain in their entire life
and never get Alzheimer's. That's
obviously true. But
no serious neurologist will dispute the
fact that a mitigant to neurogenerative
disease is to continue to use your brain
over the course of your life. It just
feels like you know now at least you can
have this sort of more open conversation
around like you know if you want to at
least mitigate the risk of
neurogenerative disease you know
continue to do all the things Sanjay
Gupta do you know if you're if you're
left-handed right with your right hand
once in a while if you're right-handed
right with your left hand once in a
while like just silly things like that
that will form you know new neural
pathways
>> this is a different type of AI
application um and you are getting
adoption with a type of knowledge worker
where people are surprised by the pace
generally considered conservative
industry has gatekeepers everything you
described earlier. Um does it what do
you believe about what would happen what
can happen in other fields or like are
there lessons for lots of entrepreneurs
that listen to this podcast? While
medicine is obviously very specific, the
human psychology is not. And everything
that was true and that we've seen
through the sort of hyperpace
consumer internet growth curve adoption
by the most traditionally skeptical
knowledge workers shows that in any um
industry or sub fields that tech might
want to touch um the same basic rules of
the game psychologically apply which is
if you address people um as people and
as consumers and if you speak to them in
a way they've never really spoken to
before and if you sort of hit them
different, you know, in a way that no
one's ever kind of come at them in that
way before. Um
that end minimum will be very refreshing
and and different and will lead to them
uh considering the thing with an open
mind and in all likelihood um will break
the mold that has typically been the
rate limit of the adoption curve of
whatever had defined that industry. I
think for a long time like if you build
it they will come has been just like
laughed at as an idea um amongst much of
the tech community. Why why do you think
there's such skepticism when like there
are the cases of you know consumer
internet companies or things like open
evidence?
>> I don't think if you build it they will
come is true. I and nor would I say that
you know Apple or Steve Jobs is a story
if that if you build it they will come.
To me, you know, Apple or Steve Jobs is
a story that um if you have
extraordinary will to power and you see
reality as malleable and uh you believe
as Nichze says that you know ideas and
rational thought are are are second
order you know uh after projections of
the will you know then you'll succeed
but that's not a you know that's not a
that's not a fairy tale that you can you
know tell to why cominator kids or to or
to MBAs, right? And there's this tension
um and this has been discussed by many
people at length, but there's this
tension in the history of western
thought between, you know, rationalism
and will, right? Reason and will or the
intellect uh and will. And the
enlightenment was this sort of um
Cambrian moment and the explosion of uh
rationalism and ideas and this sort of
uh faith. And it really is a faith
because the irony of of the
enlightenment is that the notion that
reason is supreme was not arrived at
through reason but through faith. And
there was this faith that reason would
ultimately govern and that humans are in
their first order
uh rational and kito eros and dickart
and so much of everything that
waterfalls down today to like what MBAs
or why cominator kids believe which is
just like you know so tell me Daniel
when you had the idea for open evidence
were you in a coffee shop what kind of
coffee shop what coffee were you
drinking like what what was the
circumstantial thing that gave rise is
to the idea, right? And all of that is
actually just, you know, a a derivative
idea of cartisian thought. And I think a
more useful question for people than,
you know, what coffee shop, what was the
person drinking when they had the idea
for something they admire is where can I
find um a level of motivation that is
almost um compulsive, right? And that's
different for different people. There's
no one answer, right? There there are a
lot of people that find that um from uh
proving somebody wrong. Somebody said
something to them when they were a kid
that really just hit them in the right
way when they were really
psychologically vulnerable and they've
spent the rest of their life trying to
prove that person wrong or that person
is a parent or a friend or a teacher. I
mean, how many famous examples are
there, you know, people trying to prove
a teacher wrong that, you know, that is
literally dead, you know, and that this
person's I've met these people, they're
they're 75 years old and they're trying
to prove a teacher wrong that it's been
dead for 30 years. But it turns out that
those things work. Um, and those
ingredients work. Um, and it doesn't
need to be proving someone wrong.
Uh, you know, it it could be um people
that have are born with an enormous
amount of aggression and found a
constructive way to channel that
aggression out. You know, in my case, I
was born with an just an unbelievable
amount of aggression and through a
combination of training my intellect and
just luck um I found a more useful
channel for that aggression. But you you
need to find this sort of perfect storm
of things and it has very little to do
with ideas. You know, the idea for open
evidence is the most obvious idea in the
world. It's it's the same as it's no
more creative than uh let's go to the
moon. Let's do something really hard.
What are the hard things?
>> Do you actively seek to find more
motivation for yourself?
>> No. Uh I I I and and actually the
opposite. One of the things I think is
unhelpful about the contemporary cult of
psychoanalysis and in psychology and
psychiatry that sort of traces its
origins to early 20th century and Freud
and these guys is um it doesn't
appreciate that in the analysis and
description of something you kill it. So
I've actually resisted exploring trauma.
I've resisted going back to the origins
of my motivation. and I've resisted
going back to the origins of my
aggression. I have kind of like a
partially developed map from childhood
and other experiences. But the second I
feel myself going close to analyzing it,
I I I resist the urge to analyze it
because in in the in the analysis of
something um is is the deletion of it in
a way.
>> And you already have the well and the
well is deep so it doesn't you don't
need it.
>> I I I don't need more of it. And quite
the opposite. Um I I I resist trying to
discover uh what the propulsion system
is. You know, most propulsion systems
originate from from trauma. This, you
know, the the the the what's now become
the sort of famous like Sequoia
methodology of, you know, Doug and these
guys of like talking about your early
childhood and all this stuff. I I I
think there's a lot of truth to it
except um you don't want to go too close
to that stuff because because you'll
actually kill the propulsion system in
analyzing it. What of this lens of
motivation do you take to recruiting for
your own team?
>> I quickly learned in my first company
even that um
there is a there's only a moderate
correlate. There's like a 65 correlation
between frequently smart and output. I
think you have to find people that are
obviously exceptionally intelligent but
um to all the things I've been saying
have some propulsion system. They don't
need to know where it comes from. But
we've all met people that are extremely
aggressive, are extremely driven. They
might have very little understanding of
why they are. That's better, not worse.
Better. And um and and those are the
people that end up, you know, that I try
to recruit and that I seek out in
recruiting. um because because then all
the other stuff that is I you know I
actually don't like management um and I
don't want to practice the art of
management and so much of management
needs to come into play in the absence
of those things right like a lot of this
stuff you know I'm not an MBA by
background I've never had never gone to
business school I've never had I've
never gone to one business school class
you know but I have friends that have
and I there are people I respect that
that have done those things and and you
know a lot of that world is like how to
motivate people, how to inspire people,
like how to give people constructive
feedback and constructive criticism and
all of this stuff. And I think there's
there's definitely a body of knowledge
there, like it you can definitely do
better or worse at doing those things.
But what I seek out in recruiting are
the people for whom all of that is just
entirely redundant because there's just
no like they're they're just they're
driven on their own war path and the
best you can do is sort of get out of
their way.
>> Awesome. Thanks for doing this, Daniel.
Thank you. Happy
[Music]
Find us on Twitter at no prior pod.
Subscribe to our YouTube channel if you
want to see our faces. Follow the show
on Apple Podcasts, Spotify, or wherever
you listen. That way you get a new
episode every week. And sign up for
emails or find transcripts for every
episode at no-briers.com.